### 2.3.1	Dissolution and absorption

Development of an adequate absorption model for erythromycin was complicated by the large intersubject variability in the absorption kinetics of erythromycin ([Chun 1977](# 5 References), [Mather 1981](# 5 References)). Additionally, multiple formulation types are available entailing different absorption kinetics ([Chun 1977](# 5 References), [Yakatan 1980](# 5 References), [Mather 1981](# 5 References)). The herein presented model was developed for the following oral dosage forms:

- film-coated tablets containing erythromycin stearate
- enteric-coated tablets containing erythromycin as free base
- enteric-coated capsules containing pellets of erythromycin as free base

Findings from *in vivo* studies suggest that C<sub>max</sub> scales linearly with increasing doses for erythromycin stearate in film-coated tablets ([Chun 1977](# 5 References)) and erythromycin base as pellets in enteric-coated capsules ([Josefsson 1982](# 5 References)). It was therefore assumed that absorption of erythromycin from these dosage forms is not limited by solubility which was consequently fixed to a high value in the model (500 mg/L). Data on the enteric-coated tablet containing erythromycin as free base are less conclusive. However, during model building it was found that the observed PK profile could be better described when reducing solubility. Hence, the solubility of erythromycin base in enteric-coated tablets was optimized to better capture the observed PK profile for this oral dosage form. For all three oral dosage forms, dissolution kinetics was described by a Weibull function with different parameter values for each dosage form. Optimized parameters were the `Dissolution shape` and `Dissolution time (50% dissolved)`. Additionally, for the enteric-coated formulations, a `lag time` was applied in the model to account for the passage through the stomach, while the film-coated tablet was assumed to dissolve immediately upon entering the stomach, i.e. no lag time was applied here. `Specific intestinal permeability (transcellular)` was the same for all formulations and simultaneously optimized with the other parameters.

### 2.3.2	Distribution

With an average fraction unbound in human plasma of approximately 0.30, erythromycin is moderately protein-bound. In the developed model, the `fraction unbound (plasma, reference value)` was set to 0.305 which is the value reported by [Barre 1987](# 5 References). `Lipophilicity` was fixed to a value of 2.82 which is the average of three experimentally measured values reported in the literature ([Lien 1974](# 5 References), [Capobianco 1994](# 5 References), [McFarland 1997](# 5 References)). The observed PK data were found to be best described using the model for estimating intracellular-to-plasma partition coefficients according to the method by `Rodgers and Rowland` ([Rodgers 2005](# 5 References), [Rodgers 2006](# 5 References)). Cellular permeabilities were automatically calculated using the method `Charge dependent Schmitt`  ([Open Systems Pharmacology Documentation](# 5 References)). Active transfer of erythromycin by OATP1B1 was modeled as Michaelis-Menten kinetics using an `Influx` transporter type; the `Km` value of 13.2 µM was taken from the literature ([Lancaster 2012](# 5 References)) and `kcat` was optimized to best match observed clinical data. The gene expression profile of OATP1B1 (default symbol for the gene: LST-3TM12) was loaded from the internal PK-Sim® database using the expression data quantified by RT-PCR ([Open Systems Pharmacology Documentation](# 5 References)). 

### 2.3.3	Elimination

Erythromycin is extensively metabolized via N-demethylation catalyzed by CYP3A. Kinetics of this biotransformation was described by a Michaelis-Menten process. The following kinetic parameters erythromycin N-demethylation have been measured in human liver microsomes and reported in the literature:

| Vmax [nmol/min/mg mic protein] | Km [µM] | Reference                    |
| ------------------------------ | ------- | ---------------------------- |
| 2                              | 78      | [Wang 1997](# 5 References)  |
| 0.41                           | 44      | [Wang 1997](# 5 References)  |
| 0.345                          | 88      | [Riley 1997](# 5 References) |

In the PBPK model, `Vmax` and `Km` were fixed to the mean of the values tabulated above (70 µM and 0.198 nmol/min/mg mic protein). The gene expression profile of CYP3A4 was loaded from the internal PK-Sim® database using the expression data quantified by RT-PCR ([Open Systems Pharmacology Documentation](# 5 References)).

Although it has also been observed that erythromycin is metabolized via CYP4F11 *in vitro* ([Kalsotra 2004](# 5 References)), this elimination pathway was not accounted for in the model because its contribution to overall elimination was assumed to be low. In humans, CYP4F11 is mainly expressed in the liver and to a much lesser extent in the kidney ([Cui 2000](# 5 References)) and the CYP4F family makes up approximately 15% of all hepatic CYP enzymes ([Michaels 2014](# 5 References)). The K<sub>m</sub> and V<sub>max</sub> values for the CYP4F11-mediated biotransformation reported by [Kalsotra 2004](# 5 References) are similar to those measured for CYP3A4 ([Riley 1997](# 5 References), [Wang 1997](# 5 References)), suggesting that the relative mass balance of these two metabolism pathways mainly depends on the absolute amount of each enzyme in the liver. While no information on total CYP4F11 in the human liver could be found in the literature, CYP4F11 expression in the liver of cynomolgus monkeys was observed to be approximately 6-fold lower than that of CYP3A4 ([Uehara 2015](# 5 References)). Hence, it was assumed that CYP4F11-mediated metabolism of erythromycin can be neglected in humans.

Additional elimination pathways suggested for erythromycin are acid-catalyzed degradation (hydrolysis) the acidic milieu of the stomach ([Mordi 2000](# 5 References)) and biliary excretion ([Acocella 1968](# 5 References), [Chelvan 1979](# 5 References)), but no quantitative information on the mass balance of these pathways could be found in the literature. Additionally, mechanism-based inhibition of CYP3A4 by erythromycin might constitute another clearance process which was neither considered in the model. However, a `total hepatic clearance` process was implemented in the model which could at least partly account for other elimination pathways not explicitly accounted for in the model. Of note, despite the name `total hepatic clearance`, this clearance pathway was implemented as dummy clearance accounting for additional elimination processes that are not covered by CYP3A-mediated clearance and unchanged renal excretion and it should hence rather be regarded as a partial than a total clearance. 

The reported dose fractions of erythromycin undergoing unchanged renal excretion after IV administration range from 0.018 ± 0.005 to 0.171 ± 0.11 (mean ± SD) ([Pasic 1987](# 5 References), [Austin 1980](# 5 References)). This information was accounted for in the model by implementing a glomerular filtration process and optimizing the `GFR fraction` to match the observed dose fractions excreted unchanged in urine.

### 2.3.2	Autoinhibition

In the PBPK model,  `K_kinact_half` and `kinact` were both optimized to match the observed clinical data better. To inform optimization of these two parameters better, clinical data of a midazolam-erythromycin interaction study conducted by Olkkola et al. ([Olkkola 1993](# 5 References)) were included in the parameter optimization. Specifically, the AUC of midazolam that had to be simulated by the PBPK model to match the AUC ratio reported by Olkkola et al. ([Olkkola 1993](# 5 References)) following IV and PO administration was included as observed data value in the parameter identification. This target AUC was calculated by multiplying the simulated midazolam AUC after IV and PO administration (24.3 and 54.0 µmol min/L, respectively) with the observed geometric mean AUC ratio (1.96 and 4.07 after IV and PO administration, respectively) ([Olkkola 1993](# 5 References)). This resulted in target AUCs of 47.4 and 220 µmol min/L after IV and oral administration of midazolam, respectively. In the simulations reproducing the study by Olkkola et al. ([Olkkola 1993](# 5 References)), the midazolam AUC was calculated by means of introducing an artificial reaction of a dummy molecule in the model with the reaction rate being defined as the simulated peripheral venous blood plasma concentration of midazolam. This reaction was introduced in the midazolam-erythromycin interaction PBPK models for IV and PO administration of midazolam using MoBi. Thereafter, the models were imported in PK-Sim for parameter identification.